Updating inline function documentation in the move book. (#11013)
aptos-labs/aptos-core: developer-docs-site/docs/move/book/functions.md

## Inline Functions

> Inline functions are functions whose bodies are expanded in-place at the caller location during compile time.

Reviewer: "in place" not "in-place"

Reviewer: Yes.  In "in-place algorithm" the phrase "in-place" is functioning as an adjective (modifying algorithm), while "expanded in place" the phrase "in place" is a prepositional phrase modifying the verb "expanded".  Or maybe it's that "in-place" is hyphenated because it appears *before* the modified noun.

[Here's a possible explanation ](https://writing-rag.com/153/hyphen-or-not/)

The MLA Handbook seems to have a thorough description, but it's paywalled:

A compound adjective formed from a prepositional phrase is hyphenated. The same type of compound is unhyphenated when it appears after the noun it modifies.

[2.33–2.48: Hyphens - MLA Handbook Plus](https://mlahandbookplus.org/books/book/5/chapter/56460/Hyphens#:~:text=A%20compound%20adjective%20formed%20from%20a%20prepositional%20phrase%20is%20hyphenated.&text=on%2Dcampus%20activities-,The%20same%20type%20of%20compound%20is%20unhyphenated%20when,after%20the%20noun%20it%20modifies.)

Author: I meant the various uses of "in-place" in that web page, not just the title.

For example, this is taken verbatim from that webpage: "Quicksort operates in-place on the data to be sorted." This usage of "in-place" is no different from mine. I have seen such usage of "in-place" quite commonly in CS literature, which is likely where I picked it up.

> Thus, inline functions do not appear in Move bytecode as a separate function: all calls to them are expanded away by the compiler.

Reviewer: "separate function:" -> "separate functions:"

> They allow to save gas and may lead to faster execution.

Reviewer: "They allow to save" -> "They may save"

Author: Rewriting in response to a similar comment by @movekevin

> They allow to save gas and may lead to faster execution.

Reviewer 2: The gas part is very dependent on circumstances and to whom:
1. If an inline function with nontrivial amount of code is used multiple times, the cost of deploying such a module would be much higher
2. The cost of loading such modules is also higher for the network but this is not charged yet
3. The save on an extra function call op is not very high to users I think

Author: ```suggestion
In certain circumstances, they may lead to faster execution and save gas.
```

Would this address your points succinctly?

Reviewer: This also fixes the grammar problem I tried to correct with a different suggestion.

Reviewer 2: It makes sense as a summary. I wonder if we can provide the following guideline as to when to use inline functions:
1. For library functions that want to accept a lambda argument. Currently only inline functions can do this. Might change in Move v2
2. For functions that need to return references. This is common with global storage references (from borrow_global_mut or similar functions such as smart_table::borrow_mut)
3. For lightweight functions that are either very short (a couple of lines) or those not called repeated across the module. For very long inline functions, calling many times would bloat the bytecode of the module and lead to both higher gas cost when deploying and is generally wasteful storage-wise for the network.

Author: > For library functions that want to accept a lambda argument. Currently only inline functions can do this.

This phrasing is a bit ambiguous. Can you clarify the intent here, specifically what "this" at the end means?

-----

I like your idea of guidelines. I am wondering if a consolidated place for this would be a "move coding guidelines" page, perhaps merged along with the coding conventions (https://aptos.dev/move/book/coding-conventions)?

Another option is to add this a new section below here called "typical use cases for inline functions". I am leaning towards this.

-----

> For lightweight functions that are either very short (a couple of lines) 

With inline functions calling other inline functions , even with short functions, one can create exponential bloat. Perhaps we can also warn about transitive inline function calls?

> However, users should be aware that they could lead to larger bytecode size.

Reviewer 3: May want to call out the possible limits hit by excessive inlining.  I've hit these before

One can define an inline function by adding the `inline` keyword to a function declaration as shown below:

```move=
inline fun percent(x: u64, y: u64):u64 { x * 100 / y }
```

If we call this inline function as `percent(2, 200)`, the compiler will replace this call with the inline function's body, as if the user has written `2 * 100 / 200`.

### Function parameters and lambda expressions

Inline functions support _function parameters_, which accept lambda expressions (i.e., higher-order functions) as arguments.
This feature allows writing several common programming patterns elegantly.
Similar to inline functions, lambda expressions are also expanded at call site.

A lambda expression includes a list of parameter names (enclosed within `||`) followed by the body.
Some simple examples are: `|x| x + 1`, `|x, y| x + y`, `|| 1`, `|| { 1 }`.

> A lambda's body can refer to variables available in the scope where the lambda is defined: this is also known as capturing.

Reviewer: Such variables can be read or written by the lambda (if mutable); since a lambda expression currently can only occur as a direct argument to a call to an inline function, there are no complicated scoping issues as in some other languages.

Author: I am assuming you meant add this text here. Let me know if not.

The type of a function parameter is written as `|<list of parameter types>| <return type>`.
For example, when the function parameter type is `|u64, u64| bool`, any lambda expression that takes two `u64` parameters and returns a `bool` value can be provided as the argument.

Below is an example that showcases many of these concepts in action (this example is taken from the `std::vector` module):

```move=
/// Fold the function over the elements. 
/// E.g, `fold(vector[1,2,3], 0, f)` is the same as `f(f(f(0, 1), 2), 3)`.
public inline fun fold<Accumulator, Element>(
    v: vector<Element>,
    init: Accumulator,
    f: |Accumulator,Element|Accumulator
): Accumulator {
  let accu = init;
  // Note: `for_each` is an inline function, but is not shown here.
  for_each(v, |elem| accu = f(accu, elem));
  accu
}
```

The type signature of the elided public inline function `for_each` is `fun for_each<Element>(v: vector<Element>, f: |Element|)`.

> It's second parameter `f` is a function parameter which accepts any lambda expression that consumes an `Element` and returns nothing.

Reviewer: It's --> Its

In the code example, we use the lambda expression `|elem| accu = f(accu, elem)` as an argument to this function parameter.
Note that this lambda expression captures the variable `accu` from the outer scope.

### Current restrictions

> 

Reviewer: There are plans to loosen some of these restrictions in the future, but for now,

## Inline Functions

Inline functions are functions whose bodies are expanded in place at the caller location during compile time.
Thus, inline functions do not appear in Move bytecode as a separate functions: all calls to them are expanded away by the compiler.
In certain circumstances, they may lead to faster execution and save gas.
However, users should be aware that they could lead to larger bytecode size: excessive inlining potentially triggers various size restrictions.

One can define an inline function by adding the `inline` keyword to a function declaration as shown below:

```move=
inline fun percent(x: u64, y: u64):u64 { x * 100 / y }
```

If we call this inline function as `percent(2, 200)`, the compiler will replace this call with the inline function's body, as if the user has written `2 * 100 / 200`.

### Function parameters and lambda expressions

> Inline functions support _function parameters_, which accept lambda expressions (i.e., higher-order functions) as arguments.

Reviewer: Actually, lambda expressions are not necessarily "higher-order functions". 
 They are "anonymous functions".  Change this to "lambda expressions or anonymous functions as arguments".

Actually, I would be tempted to change the term to "anonymous function" everywhere and reference "lambda expressions" as a related term here.

This feature allows writing several common programming patterns elegantly.
Similar to inline functions, lambda expressions are also expanded at call site.

A lambda expression includes a list of parameter names (enclosed within `||`) followed by the body.
Some simple examples are: `|x| x + 1`, `|x, y| x + y`, `|| 1`, `|| { 1 }`.
A lambda's body can refer to variables available in the scope where the lambda is defined: this is also known as capturing.

> Such variables can be read or written (if mutable) by the lambda expression; since a lambda expression currently can only occur as a direct argument to a call to an inline function, there are no complicated scoping issues as in some other languages.

Reviewer 4: As our audience isn't necessarily acquainted with many other languages, not sure whether this is perhaps an overkill to point to some problems they likely are not aware of.

Author: I added this upon @brianrmurphy's suggestion. Unless you have a strong opinion against it, I'll keep it.

Reviewer 4: I understand why you added it. However, I'm against the side sentence about "complicated issues in other languages" and ask to remove only that one. The audience of the Move book is not a language designer, so pointing to complicated issues in other languages is of little help. Unless you actually want to go the way to explain those complicated issues, which isn't a good idea either.

Author: Fair enough, thank you for the clarification.

I'll change this to "Such variables can be read or written (if mutable) by the lambda expression."

Reviewer: The fact that we call them "lambda expressions" when they don't contain the word "lambda" invokes other languages already.  Unless you want to write more complete explanation of that term you have to expect they are going to find out about "lambda expressions" from another source.

Reviewer 4: Lambda expressions is what every developer heard about from any modern language. But what those "complicated scoping issues" are, I doubt. Its all not that important, I mainly added this minor comment to be clear about what audience the Move book addresses -- it is not a language nerd.

    init: Accumulator,
    f: |Accumulator,Element|Accumulator
): Accumulator {
  let accu = init;
  // Note: `for_each` is an inline function, but is not shown here.
  for_each(v, |elem| accu = f(accu, elem));
  accu
}
```

The type signature of the elided public inline function `for_each` is `fun for_each<Element>(v: vector<Element>, f: |Element|)`.
Its second parameter `f` is a function parameter which accepts any lambda expression that consumes an `Element` and returns nothing.
In the code example, we use the lambda expression `|elem| accu = f(accu, elem)` as an argument to this function parameter.
Note that this lambda expression captures the variable `accu` from the outer scope.

### Current restrictions

There are plans to loosen some of these restrictions in the future, but for now,

- Only inline functions can have function parameters.
- Only explicit lambda expressions can be passed as an argument to an inline function's function parameters.
- Inline functions and lambda expressions cannot have `return` expressions.
- Inline functions or lambda expressions cannot return lambda expressions.
- Cyclic recursion involving only inline functions is not allowed.

> - Parameters in lambda expressions should not be type annotated (e.g., `|x: u64| x + 1` is not allowed): their types are inferred.

Reviewer: "should not" --> "may not"

Author: It is actually a parse error if they are, so "should not" or "must not" is more appropriate here.

Reviewer: "should not" is inappropriate, as it implies that there is a possibility to do it.  This discussion seems mostly right: ["may not" means "are not permitted to".  "must not" means](https://english.stackexchange.com/questions/471482/difference-between-should-must-can-may).

But this is perhaps a more relevant reference: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc2119.  It doesn't define "may not" but negating "MAY" gives the sense I mean.  "SHOULD NOT" is definitely not what you mean here.  "MUST NOT" would be ok.

Author: Going with "must not", thanks for the rfc reference: it is pretty handy!

> - Parameters in lambda expressions should not be type annotated (e.g., `|x: u64| x + 1` is not allowed): their types are inferred.

Reviewer 4: Are we sure that types in lambda parameters aren't working? I definitely extended the parser to support this for v2, but forgot how v1 deals with this. Perhaps try it out first?

Author: Yes. I tried the following code on the main branch:

```
module 0xc0ffee::dummy1 {

    inline fun apply(f: |u64|u64, x: u64): u64 {
        f(x)
    }

    fun applier(): u64 {
        apply(|x: u64| x + 1, 1)
    }
}

```

and got the error: 
```
  │         apply(|x: u64| x + 1, 1)
  │               - ^ Expected '|'
  │               │  
  │               To match this '|'
```

Note that the same parse error shows up for compiler v2 as well.
